---
layout: post
title: As far away as possible
categories: [a_trip, psychoactive]
tags: [life, answer, 42, tabs]
---

While the visitors were leaving I made it onto the small platform above a little bush that was half-burnt from the strong sun. This platform had a little staircase into a treehouse, which had multiple little fake flowers growing around the entrance. This platform had a small indent for a specific key. The indent looked something like a small cross with two horizontal bars. Someone surely knew where the key was.

It was a sunny afternoon and our hill was alive more than ever. People came to taste these one-of-a-kind foods that were made with special spices that grow only here. It was tried if they grew anywhere else, but they survive only here. Maybe this has something to do with the indent on the platform next to the farmhouse. It was there even before my time. Not even the landlord knows how long that treehouse existed, he always goes about hating that tree, as if he wants to break it down. I wonder what the deal with this guy is..

There was someone special here that I always looked after and took care of. She was the same as I, came from nowhere just to get rid of her past. She had a white thin face with a smooth chin. You could say that she was an elf. Her cheeks always fascinated me because they never got red, even if the feeling was there. She had a small nose that was turned up a little bit at the top, it looked pretty on her face. Her eyes were big, a greenish brown color filled with an innocent sparkle. But I can assure you she was everything else than that. Always when someone troublesome came she made the innocence that always surrounded her dissapear. Her hips were a bit too wide for her to be an elf. It makes me wonder if she is a halfling. Her name was Khilsa. A name from the southern parts of these lands. So she could be from around here. I don't know.

We were 6 people working and living here. We were all hand picked from a whole battalion of people by the landlord. There was one gnome that only cared for the water supply and his weird wizardry that didn't do much more that move a rock. His name was Boldefan. Then there is one rather large peewan. His name is Argor. This is the first peewan I ever saw. They are good with animals, at least so they say. But Argor was different, his skills were far of from his kinds. He took care of the roads around and on this hill, keeping them clear of rubbish and lighting the lamps before night, refilling them on a weekly basis. He made himself a small vehicle out of wood and stone. He was reading some of Boldefans books so he could charge the vehicle with spirit that makes it move. A rather younger specimen from the Deadfolk was also here, he was always hiding in the caves above the farm taking care of the injured dragon. This is the first injured dragon that I ever saw. I didn't know their armour could be pierced, let alone that they are kind to folk. He never told me his name. He was the dishwasher. The landlord was the cook. He is a rather weird species. He was a faun. I thought they died out before I saw him. He never talks and is always obssesed with the

